So in the last lecture we created the sidebar here.
So we, first we registered a sidebar using the register_sidebar() function and we gave it unique ID here "primary-
sidebar".
And that created an area in the wp-admin where we can drag and drop widgets in the Primary Sidebar.
And then to display this primary sidebar bar we use a function called dynamic_sidebar() and we gave it
the ID of the sidebar.
And that's what appears here.
So in this lecture we need to do pretty much the same thing.
Only this time it will be a little different.
So here's the template that I already created to prepare for this course. And I have my footer here.
And what we need to do is create multiple sidebars for each column in the footer.
So we have the first column that has the recent posts widget. And it could also have another widgets
below this one.
And the second column with the tags will also have multiple widgets and so on. But we also need this
number of columns to be dynamic.
We need to get some input from the user.
And depending on this input we'll have to create different number of sidebars.
So what I'm proposing is, we will instruct the user that he have to type a comma separated values for
each column.
In other words, if they let's say typed 3, 3, 3, 3 this will mean 4 columns and
each column will span 3 columns, you know, 12 column width system.
So the total of these numbers should not be more than 12.
So for example 6 and 6 would create 2 columns here.
And each one would have a sidebar with its own widgets.
So in this example here this is 3 and 3 and 3 and 3.
So let's do it.
So first we need to register new sidebars. But this time it will be different. This time we don't
know how many sidebars we need to register. And to know that we need the user's input, right?
Later in the course we'll have an entire section about how to get input from the user.
You know for theme options and settings and stuff like that.
But for now let's just assume that we have an input from the, let's define a variable.
I'm gonna call it $footer_layout.
And let's hardcode it for now and later we will, you know, create a text area where user can type and
this and then we get the user's input. So let's assume he typed 4 threes. And let's also create a
new variable called $footer_bg.
And we hardcode it for now.
So this would be either dark or light background.
And then later we will create an option for the user to choose whether he needs a light footer or
a dark footer.
Now we need to register our sidebar.
And that as mentioned will depend on how many numbers the user type here.
So in our case it's 4.
But maybe the user would type something else.
So what we can do is we can convert this variable into, instead of a comma separated string, into an array
of numbers.
So we can use a PHP  function explode(). And this function takes a separator which is in our case a ","
and a string.
So $footer_layout.
So this variable $footer_layout will now hold an array of 3 and 3 and 3 and 3.
And now we can loop over this array and register a sidebar for each iteration, right? So let's call
this variable $columns and then let's
go ahead and create a foreach loop.
So "foreach ( $columns as $i => $column)".
So $i will be the index and $column will be the current number which is 3 and 3 and 3 and
so on. And for each iteration we need to register sidebar.
So "register_sidebar()" and we'll have an array of arguments.
So we've done that before.
So let's actually copy these and edit them instead of typing the whole thing.
So this is not primary-sidebar anymore
this is a footer-sidebar.
But as we mentioned this should be unique so for each iteration let's append the index.
So "$i + 1".
And for the name let's call it "Footer
"Footer Widgets"
and then "Column" and then the number.
So remember how we put variables in a string that is translated and escaped.
We use printf().
sprintf()
if you don't want to echo. And the second argument is the number which is "$i+1".
And the description. I'll just type "Footer widgets". And "before_widget" I have a class defined in the CSS called
"c-footer-widget". And let's remove the margin.
And let's just add something that will change the color scheme of the widget.
So I mentioned we have a footer background option here.
So if the footer background is dark we need the widget to be light and vice versa.
So let's create a new variable. Let's call it $widget_theme.
And then a simple if condition here. If footer background is light
then the $widget_theme should be dark.
So I have a class called "c-footer-widget--dark".
And if you read about the BEM naming convention for CSS, the "--" is a modifier, it changes some
stuff in the component. So "dark" will make the widget dark
and the other one is light.
So if it's not light it's dark. So the class should be "light". And then we will copy this variable and append it in
the class here.
So, like so.
we don't have to change anything here. So let's go to the wp-admin.
And we should expect 4 new sidebars. So let's go to this page and refresh it.
And great. We have now Footer Widgets Column 1 and 2 and 3 and 4.
Let's try and maybe remove one of these. And we now only have three sidebars.
So this is the first step registering
the sidebars.
Now we need to display them.
So this will be similar to what we have done in the sidebar.php using dynamic_sidebar() to load
the sidebar.
So let's do this.
So in the footer.php let's create a new div.
And I'm gonna put some classes that I styled in my CSS so "c-footer" and then close
it.
I guess we also need to access the theme options that we defined in the sidebars in the footer.
We need to know the columns and the footer background also.
So let's copy these.
And then as I mentioned, later we will this will be dynamic. And it's open a PHP tag.
Sorry "<?php" and paste.
So now I've access to these options so if we have a dark background we need a class called "c-
footer--" and then the footer background.
So let's open a PHP tag and then "echo $footer_bg".
So this will add a class footer
"c-footer c-footer--dark" for a dark background.
And on the other hand in the sidebar if it's dark it will add a classs light for the widget.
So now we need to create a row with columns and the columns will depend on the user's input.
So let's create a class="o-container".
And then another one. A row, so "o-row".
And then inside the row we'll need to create the columns.
So here where we will have to do a similar loop that we did here.
So let's open a PHP tag and start a "foreach" loop "foreach ( $columns
as $i => $column )"
And open { and close PHP.
And then open PHP tag and close the loop. And then inside here we'll have some HTML.
So now we need to create a column which will span the current column, which will be 3 and 3
and 3 and 3.
So let's go to index to copy.
It's longer class here. So let's copy this one
and paste it and close.
And what we need to change is the "span-4@medium".
So let's open a PHP.
tag
and inside of it let's "echo $column".
So let's save and before going further let's see what this have done.
So here we now have a footer,an empty footer. And that seems packed in have container, row and then we have
4 columns each one spanning 3.
So let's change one of these to 4 for example.
And now we're having 3 3 3 and 4, great.
So let's now display the sidebar.
So what we need to do is like we did for the other sidebar. we need to check if the sidebar is active
and if so we will display it using dynamic_sidebar(). So let's open a PHP tag and if a sidebar active or is_active_
sidebar and then I remember the ID
was footer-sidebar and then the index.
Right?
So "footer-sidebar-"
and then "($i+1)".
So this will check if each column in the loop is active and then. So let's close the PHP here.
And if this condition is true dynamic_sidebar() and then the ID which is the same as this one. So let's
copy this and add it here and ;. And this should do it.
So let's go to.
We have an error here. And I just forgot to append here and here.
So this. Let's now go to the admin and add some widgets. So let's add the categories.
And add tags.
And maybe some text.
And finally let's have a gallery.
Select some images
and save. Now if you refresh our web site.
And here we have it.
So let's do something like changing the layout. So let's  try 4, 4, 4.
And we now have 3 columns each one spanning 4 columns in the grid system.
Let's try and change this to "light". And we'll also have to change it in the sidebars.
But of course when this field is in the theme options we won't have to change it manually.
So now we have a light footer.
Of course that's not the best styling
but as I mentioned it's not CSS or design course so this will do.
So let's get back these variables. Let's finally add, here in the finished website we have, a text here.
And later this text will be also the element from the theme options.
So let's add
the markup for this one.
So in footer.php and after the "c-footer" class let's add another one
and this one is called "c-site-info".
It also needs the background colors so "c-site-info--" the footer background.
Close it and then inside of it we will have also to go into a container.
Let's copy this as to save some time.
And we have
inside the row, a column.
So let's copy this one.
Of course if you're talking it compose the video and copy.
So this will span 12 and that will also have a class called
"c-site-info__text".
So let's close it. And let's now type some text and later we will get this text also from the theme options. So
So it should look like this one now.
And here it is.
And finally let's just cover and in each case imagine the user did not put any widgets in all the columns.
So let's delete all these.
And then let's refresh.
So we'll have this empty space here which looks weird.
So we need to check first if, before the  footer sidebars are empty.
We don't have to display this thing at all. So in the footer
let's create a flag and call it $widgets_active
and set this to "false".
And then we need to loop over the $columns.
Then check
if any of them is active.
So "is_active_sidebar()" and then we can copy the ID from here. So "footer-sidebar-" current index.
If any one of them is active,
we'll have to set the flag to "true".
So $widgets_active = true".
And thenlet's add an if condition here. If $widgets_active, or at least one column is
active display the footer.
Otherwise we don't have to display the footer so
let's close it.
So now we don't have any footer.
And if we had just one widget we'll have it. Great.
So I think this was a long lecture. Let's carry on in the next lecture.